# Type30
#### Video Demo:  <URL HERE>
#### Description: Hello world! My name is Ben and my CS50 Final Project is titled 'Type30'.
#### Type30 is a responsive web application game that essentially tests users on how fast they are able to type 30 random generated word called using an API! I chose this as my final project as I have always loved typing on my keyboard as the sounds produced from my mechanical keyboard after every quick keystroke are soothing to my ears. This project was heavily inspired by more sophisticated websites such as '10FastFingers' and 'TypeRacer'. The application was built utilizing HTML/CSS and Javascript to handle the front-end whilst Python(Flask) and SQLite for the back-end. 

#### Upon a users visit to the website, they will be directed to the homepage. The user can then use the navbar to direct themselves to the game by clicking 'Play'. The 'Play' page consists of a container which consists of a word display box which will generate 30 random words from an API call each time the page is visited. Under the word display box, consists of an input field to where the user can begin typing letters. On the right side of the input field is a timer and a reset button. The reset button will refresh the page on click. The timer starts at 0 seconds and will begin counting up only after the user decides to type something in the input field. As the user types correct letters corresponding to the letter's of each word, the letter will then light up. After successfully typing a word, the word will then be deleted from the word display box to shift the next word to the deleted word's original position. This will continue happening until the user finishes typing all 30 words and will only then, the timer will stop counting up. The user logged in will have their final times recorded on a database. If the user has already played several games, their time will only be updated if they were able to beat the time found in their database. 

#### From the navbar, there is also a 'boards' href which will direct the user to a leaderboard showing the rankings and user of who participated in the game. The leaderboard is sorted based on who had the fastest time. If the user has played the game and has not registered or logged into their account, their times will not be recorded. On the top right of the navbar is where the user can register and log in for their accounts. The 'boards' href, however, can be viewed by everyone no matter if they are logged in or not.

#### Struggles of the Project: After finishing Week 8 and Week 9's respective p-sets, I felt confident going into the final project. I decided to not use the CS50 codespace which ultimately resulted in me not having access to the CS50 library. This was due to me not wanting to rely on the CS50 library. However, after I developing the beginning aspects of my project, all my confidence I once had flew out the window. I did not really know how to structure my website using HTMl/CSS, so a lot of my time was spent developing a satisfactory layout for div placements and contrasting colors. It was almost like I forgot everything I have ever learned in Week 8. I had to then rewatch CS50 lectures and do a bunch of googling to find solutions for my problems. Even after developing the structure and style, the logic for the Type30 game still needed to be implemented using Javascript. This was where I spent MOST of my time on. 

#### JavaScript Struggles: At first, I wanted to ultimately develop a clone of the '10FastFingers' website, but realized during the process of coding the Javascript, that I lacked the knowledge to develop the code necessary for my web-application to behave as such. So I decided to have Type30 to be less sophisticated. Despite this, I still ran into a lot of trouble due to my lack of experience in utilizing Javascript proficiently. I had to learn several new concepts of Javascript such as fetch, DOM manipulation, and XMLHttpRequests to fully build the Type30 game. Fetch was one of the first things I learned to call upon data from an API. After fetching the data, a problem arose with rendering the actual words on the word display box. Adding an event listener to wait for the entire DOM to be loaded became a solution as the whole HTML needed to be parsed before the data fetched can be displayed. The algorithm to have the letters light up green or red depending on whether the user's input correlates to the letter next up on the display box was very difficult to implement too. The 30 words rendered in the display box is essentially a very long string. Each character of the spring had a span tag appended so that it can be later manipulated individually. Adding an eventlistener for inputs done by the user for both the timer and input field. After the user has completed the game, there needed to be a way for the time to be recorded on the existing database for the user in session because the time was stored in a variable on the Javascript file, however, Python is what it is going to be used to make SQL queries. The XMLHttpRequest does exactly that, it allows for Javascript variables to be passed on to Python.

#### Python: Flask was used to handle the backend data of Type30. Using the concepts and methods taught from Week 9, this part of the project took the least amount of time. However, due to the use of the CS50 library from the Finance P-set. There was a need for some additional lines of code in order to query the database in the same manner. Using the XMLHttpRequest written through the Javascript, the variable storing the "time" for when the user finishes their game has been passed through to Python. This was then easily stored on the database using SQL queries.


#### Files: The static folder consists of the Javascript, CSS, and an icon. The JavaScript handles the logic of the Type30 game. The templates folder consists of all the HTML utilizing Jinja to allow for a more dynamic feel to the web application when having to flash messages or not spending additional time rewriting the same lines of code. In the main directory, app.py imports the login_required function taken from settings.py given from the CS50 distribution code used in the Finance p-set. All the SQL queries, rendering of the templates, and message flashing happens thorugh app.py.